# Containerized `bitcoind`

This repo builds [`bitcoind`] and packages it into a minimal Docker containers provided for various CPU architectures.

> The work here was initially based on [lncm/docker-bitcoind](https://github.com/lncm/docker-bitcoind), but has significantly diverged since.

## Usage

### Pull

First pull the image from [Docker Hub]:

```bash
docker pull frankhinek/bitcoind:v28.0
```

> **NOTE:** Running above will automatically choose native architecture of your CPU.

Or, to pull a specific CPU architecture:

```bash
docker pull frankhinek/bitcoind:v28.0-arm64v8
``` 

### Start

First, create a directory on your host system which will store the [`bitcoind`]
configuration file and bitcoin chain data.  For example, to use a directory
named `.bitcoin` in your home directory:

```sh
mkdir ~/.bitcoin
```

Next, create a config file:

```sh
touch ~/.bitcoin/bitcoin.conf
```

You can take a look at the following sample: thebox-compose-system ([1](https://github.com/lncm/thebox-compose-system/blob/master/bitcoin/bitcoin.conf)).

Some guides on how to configure bitcoin can be found [here](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/master/doc/bitcoin-conf.md) (bitcoin git repo)

Then to start bitcoind, run:

```bash
docker run  -it  --rm  --detach \
    -v ~/.bitcoin:/data/.bitcoin \
    -p 8332:8332 \
    -p 8333:8333 \
    --name bitcoind \
    frankhinek/bitcoind:v28.1
```

That will run bitcoind such that:

* all data generated by the container is stored in `~/.bitcoin` **on your host machine**,
* port `8332` will be reachable for the RPC communication,
* port `8333` will be reachable for the peer-to-peer communication,
* created container will get named `bitcoind`,
* within the container, `bitcoind` binary is run as unprivileged user `bitcoind` (`UID=1000`),
* that command will run the container in the background and print the ID of the container being run.

#### Interact

To issue any commands to a running container, do:

```bash
docker exec -it bitcoind BINARY COMMAND
```

Where:
* `BINARY` is either `bitcoind`, `bitcoin-cli`, `bitcoin-tx`, or `bitcoin-wallet` and
* `COMMAND` is something you'd normally pass to the binary   

Examples:

```bash
docker exec -it bitcoind bitcoind --help
docker exec -it bitcoind bitcoind --version
docker exec -it bitcoind bitcoin-cli --help
docker exec -it bitcoind bitcoin-cli -getinfo
docker exec -it bitcoind bitcoin-cli getblockcount
```

#### Speed Up Initial Block Download

The Bitcoin Core v28 release added support for a new feature called AssumeUTXO that enables full nodes to defer verification of old blockchain history by loading a recent snapshot of the UTXO set at a specific block height and syncing to chain tip from that point. This allows wallets and other software using the full node to start receiving and sending transactions within minutes of the node being started instead of having to wait hours or days for it to sync and validate the chain from the genesis block.

When you use AssumeUTXO, the node starts syncing from the snapshot to the chain tip, then the node downloads and verifies the old blockchain history in the background until it eventually verifies its initial UTXO state at the loaded snapshot, allowing it to ultimately obtain the same trustless security as a node that doesn’t use AssumeUTXO.

1. Download a UTXO Snapshot file (9.77 GB) to your `bitcoin/` directory:

   ```sh
   wget --show-progress --no-clobber -P bitcoin/ https://lopp.net/download/utxo-snapshot-height-840000.dat
   ```

1. Run Bitcoin Core.

1. Wait for the block headers to finish syncing (should take 2 to 3 minutes).

    ```sh
    bitcoind  | 2025-02-13T20:58:22Z Pre-synchronizing blockheaders, height: 2000 (~0.24%)
    bitcoind  | 2025-02-13T20:58:23Z Pre-synchronizing blockheaders, height: 4000 (~0.47%)
    ...
    bitcoind  | 2025-02-13T21:00:40Z Synchronizing blockheaders, height: 1379 (~0.16%)
    bitcoind  | 2025-02-13T21:00:40Z Synchronizing blockheaders, height: 3379 (~0.40%)
    ...
    bitcoind  | 2025-02-13T21:02:15Z Synchronizing blockheaders, height: 882000 (~99.82%)
    bitcoind  | 2025-02-13T21:02:15Z Synchronizing blockheaders, height: 883631 (~100.00%)
    ```

1. Load the UTXO snapshot:
    ```sh
    docker exec -it bitcoind bitcoin-cli -rpcclienttimeout=0 loadtxoutset /data/.bitcoin/utxo-snapshot-height-840000.dat
    ```

1. Wait for the UTXO snapshot loading process to finish (this will take 20 to 30 minutes depending upon the speed of your machine).

Once the command finishes, your node's sync progress will jump forward to the block height of the snapshot (840000) and continue syncing normally from there.

After it reaches chain tip, the node will start performing a sync from genesis in the background, but the node will be usable.

### Docker Compose
Here is a docker-compose.yml for mainnet

```yaml
services:
  bitcoin:
    image: frankhinek/bitcoind:v28.1
    container_name: bitcoind
    user: 1000:1000
    volumes:
      - ./bitcoin:/data/.bitcoin
    restart: on-failure
    stop_grace_period: 15m30s
    ports:
      - "8333:8333"  # P2P port
      - "8332:8332"  # RPC port
```

First, ensure that the `bitcoin/` folder is in the directory containing docker-compose.yml.

Then, Docker Compose will mount the `bitcoin/` folder to `/data/.bitcoin`.

To start the Docker Compose project as a daemon:

```sh
docker compose up -d
```

To view the logs:

```sh
docker compose logs -f
```

## Build

```sh
cd v28.1/
docker buildx build --platform linux/arm64 -t frankhinek/bitcoind:v28.1 .
```

```sh
docker push frankhinek/bitcoind:v28.1
```

[`bitcoind`]: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin
[Docker Hub]: https://hub.docker.com/r/frankhinek/bitcoind